Website: Add config-as-code blog article (#47707)
fleetdm/fleet: articles/the-cost-of-code-as-config.md

# The hidden cost of config-as-code: simplicity, tribal knowledge, and what stays in Git

Config-as-code has quietly become the default expectation for device management. Jamf, Zentral, Workspace ONE, and Fleet all let you describe your endpoints in a repository, review changes through pull requests, and keep an audit trail of who changed what and why. That convergence is a good thing. The argument about *whether* to manage devices as code is mostly over.

> The argument still worth having is about cost. Not the license, the cost in time, in skill, and in dependence on a single person. Two config-as-code setups can deliver the same governance benefits and still ask very different things of the team that has to live with them. Before you adopt one, it's worth being honest about which kind you're signing up for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The argument still worth having is about cost. Not the license cost. The cost in time, in skill, and in dependence on a single person. Two config-as-code setups can deliver the same governance benefits and still ask very different things of the team that has to live with them. Before you adopt one, it's worth being honest about which kind you're signing up for.
```

This isn't a knock on any tool. It's a question every IT leader should ask before committing: when the person who set this up moves on, does the knowledge leave with them, or does it stay in Git?

## Two roads to the same place

There are broadly two ways device platforms approach config-as-code today.

> The first builds the workflow into the product. You write configuration files in a documented schema, run a single command, and the platform reconciles itself to match. Fleet works this way. A set of YAML files describes the desired state of the instance, and `fleetctl gitops` (typically a one-line step in a GitHub Actions or GitLab pipeline) applies them. There's no extra tool to install along and no separate state to manage. The repository is the source of truth, and the Fleet instance is the live state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first builds the workflow into the product. You write configuration files in a documented schema, run a single command, and the platform reconciles itself to match. Fleet works this way. A set of YAML files describes the desired state of the instance, and `fleetctl gitops` (typically a one-line step in a GitHub Actions or GitLab pipeline) applies them. There's no extra tool to install and no separate state to manage. The repository is the source of truth, and the Fleet instance is the live state.
```

> The first builds the workflow into the product. You write configuration files in a documented schema, run a single command, and the platform reconciles itself to match. Fleet works this way. A set of YAML files describes the desired state of the instance, and `fleetctl gitops` (typically a one-line step in a GitHub Actions or GitLab pipeline) applies them. There's no extra tool to install along and no separate state to manage. The repository is the source of truth, and the Fleet instance is the live state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first builds the workflow into the product. You write configuration files in a documented schema, run a single command, and the platform reconciles itself to match. Fleet works this way. A set of YAML files describes the desired state of the instance, and `fleetctl gitops` (typically a one-line step in a GitHub Actions or GitLab pipeline) applies them. There's no extra tool to install along and no separate state to manage. The repository is the source of truth, and the Fleet instance is the live state. If someone edits a setting in the console that's defined in YAML, the next GitOps run resets it back to what's in Git. Drift correction is built into the apply, with no separate reconciliation tool to run.
```

> The second exposes the product through [Terraform](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform) or the drop-in replacement [Open Tofu](https://opentofu.org). You describe resources in HashiCorp Configuration Language (HCL), and a provider translates those resources into API calls. This is how config-as-code reaches Jamf Pro, Zentral, and lately Workspace ONE today. It's a legitimate and, in capable hands, powerful approach. Terraform is excellent software, and a mature provider like Zentral's slots cleanly into a team that already runs infrastructure-as-code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second exposes the product through [Terraform](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform) or the drop-in replacement [Open Tofu](https://opentofu.org). You describe resources in HashiCorp Configuration Language (HCL), and a provider translates those resources into API calls. This is how config-as-code reaches Jamf Pro, Zentral, and, more recently, Workspace ONE. It's a legitimate and, in capable hands, powerful approach. Terraform is excellent software, and a mature provider like Zentral's slots cleanly into a team that already runs infrastructure-as-code.
```

Neither road is wrong. But they don't cost the same to travel, and the difference is easy to underestimate from a demo.

## What Terraform brings along

> Using Terraform for device management means focusing to apply the broad set of primary resources it controls rather than on just a few fragmented device-level details. That's not a criticism of the tool. It's simply what the tool and provider is build for. The conceptual surface includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using Terraform for device management means taking on the full set of concerns the tool was designed for, not just the device-level objects you're trying to change. That's not a criticism of the tool. It's simply what the tool and provider are built for. The conceptual surface includes:
```
Covers both review P2-2 and P2-8

> - **Providers.** Each platform needs at least one provider to source, version-pin, authenticate, and keep current. In the Jamf world, full coverage can mean running two side by side: the community Jamf Pro provider for classic configuration and Jamf's newer official platform provider for modern features, bridged by a data source that translates one object's ID into another's. The Workspace ONE provider, by contrast, is still labeled tech preview, with a deliberately narrow set of resources.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Providers.** Each platform needs at least one provider to source, version-pin, authenticate, and keep current. In the Jamf world, full coverage can mean running two side by side: the community Jamf Pro provider for classic configuration and the Jamf Platform Terraform provider, published by Jamf Concepts under an open-source license, for modern features, bridged by a data source that translates one object's ID into another's. The Workspace ONE UEM provider, by contrast, is still in tech preview and scoped to macOS management today.  
```

This covers both review P1-1 and P2-4.

None of this is exotic to a platform engineer. It’s real work that infrastructure teams have done for over a decade, and it keeps coming: provider upgrades, breaking changes, drift, state hygiene. The point isn’t that it’s hard. The point is that it's *there*, to stay, every day, whether or not the smaller task in front of you needed it.

## A concrete comparison: assigning a group

Consider the most ordinary task in device management: define a group of devices and scope something to it.

In Fleet, a label is a few lines of YAML, and targeting it is a list of names:

```yml
labels:
  - name: Engineering
    description: Hosts used by engineers
    label_membership_type: host_vitals
    criteria:
      vital: end_user_idp_department
      value: Engineering
```

```yml
software:
  packages:
    - path: ../platforms/macos/packages/figma.package.yml
      labels_include_any:
        - Engineering
```

There's no separate assignment object, no ID to resolve, and no reference graph to reason about. A reviewer reads the diff and understands it immediately: this group is defined by IdP department, and this app now goes to it.

> The Terraform equivalent does the same job, but the structure is heavier. A smart group is its own resource, the thing being scoped references the group by an ID, and in the modern Jamf case you may first need a data source to translate the group's classic ID into the UUID another resource expects. Assignments live in nested blocks, and groups are probably referenced as raw UUID strings rather than readable names. It works, and works well. But a reviewer needs to understand HCL, resource references, and the plan output to know what the change will actually do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Terraform equivalent does the same job, but the structure is heavier. A smart group is its own resource, and the thing being scoped references that group by ID rather than by name. Assignments live in nested blocks, and groups are typically addressed by numeric IDs or UUIDs rather than the readable names you'd use in YAML.
```

When you evaluate a config-as-code approach, the most useful question isn't "what's the ceiling of what this can express?" It's "who on my team can read a change, approve it, and ship it without help?" If the honest answer is "whoever owns Terraform," that's worth knowing before you commit, not after.

This matters most for teams without a dedicated platform-engineering function, which is most IT teams. For those teams the setup cost of the built-in approach is minimal: "install the CLI, generate a starter repo, add a pipeline step, and place assets in a clear folder structure." The setup cost of the Terraform approach is a project: choose and pin providers, stand up remote state with locking, design a module and variable layout, build import flows for what already exists, and train people to read plans without fear. Both get you to config-as-code. One gets you there this week, with the whole team able to follow along.

> ## You don't have to go all in on day one

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## You don't have to go all in on day one: GitOps exceptions
```

There's a quieter objection underneath all of this, and it's the one that stops a lot of teams before they start: config-as-code feels like an all-or-nothing commitment. The moment you point a GitOps workflow at your instance, the repository becomes the source of truth, and anything you change in the GUI gets reverted on the next run. For a team that wants the benefits of GitOps but isn't ready to move *everything* into Git yet, that's a real deterrent. Most adoption stories don't begin with the whole estate in version control. They begin with one or two things, and a lot of nervousness about the rest.

The honest answer is that you shouldn't have to choose between full GitOps and no GitOps. A good config-as-code workflow should let you phase it in: manage the parts you're confident about in Git, keep the rest editable in the console while you get comfortable, and move things over as the team is ready. The transition should meet you where you are, not demand a big-bang cutover.

> This is exactly the friction Fleet's GitOps exceptions feature was built to remove, and it's worth noting it started as a customer idea rather than a roadmap item. When GitOps mode is enabled, an admin can opt specific resource types out of GitOps enforcement (software, labels, and enroll secrets), leaving those manageable through the UI or API while everything else stays governed by Git. The practical effect is a gradual ramp: start by managing policies and configuration profiles in Git, then fold in software and labels later once the team has its footing. Exceptions are configured per resource type and require global-admin permissions, and Fleet guards against the obvious foot-gun: if a resource is both excepted *and* defined in a YAML file, the GitOps dry run surfaces a clear error rather than silently overwriting your console-managed changes. ClickOps and GitOps coexist on purpose, for as long as you need them to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is exactly the friction Fleet's GitOps exceptions feature was built to remove, and it's worth noting it was built in response to customer feedback that all-or-nothing GitOps adoption was a barrier. Released in Fleet 4.84.0, GitOps exceptions let an admin opt specific resource types out of GitOps enforcement (software, labels, and enroll secrets), leaving those manageable through the UI or API while everything else stays governed by Git. The practical effect is a gradual ramp: start by managing policies and configuration profiles in Git, then fold in software and labels later once the team has its footing. Exceptions are configured per resource type and require global-admin permissions, and Fleet guards against the obvious foot-gun: if a resource is both excepted *and* defined in a YAML file, the GitOps dry run surfaces a clear error rather than silently overwriting your console-managed changes. ClickOps and GitOps coexist on purpose, for as long as you need them to.
```

Covers review P2-6 and Requires Verification-bullet 2

Config-as-code is the right direction for device management, no matter which road you take to get there. Both roads give you version history, peer review, and an audit trail. What differs is the overhead you carry along the way, and whether the people who come after you can pick up where you left off.

Tools should lower the barrier to participation, not raise it. The more your team can read, review, and ship changes without routing everything through one specialist, the more resilient your operation is, and the more of your hard-won knowledge stays put when someone moves on.

The best workflow is the one your whole team can still run after you're gone. Evaluate accordingly.

## See it live

The quickest way to see this in detail is to inspect our [it-and-security](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/tree/main/it-and-security) folder to review the config, then download the [fleetctl](https://fleetdm.com/download) CLI and run `fleetctl new` to generate the GitOps scaffold. If you’d like help getting started, two good next steps are:

- [**Get a demo**](https://fleetdm.com/contact)**.**  We'll walk through how Config-as-Code and GitOps Exceptions would work in your environment.

> - [**Join a GitOps training session**](https://fleetdm.com/gitops-workshop)**.** Learn to manage configuration as code: set up apps, configs, reports, and policies in Git, review changes with pull requests, and deploy through CI in our hands‑on workshop..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [**Join a GitOps training session**](https://fleetdm.com/gitops-workshop)**.** Learn to manage configuration as code: set up apps, configs, reports, and policies in Git, review changes with pull requests, and deploy through CI in our hands‑on workshop.
```
